README.md, before:

# 👮 Blacklister

Blacklist is a package for **Laravel** applications that enables you to validate email inputs against a blacklist.
You can block specific email addresses or entire domains.

## ⬇️ Installation

Install the package via composer:

```bash
composer require niclas-timm/blacklister
```

Next, run the following command to boostrap the necessary configuration:

```bash
php artisan blacklister:install
```

This does a few things:

1. It creates a `config/blacklister.php` file
2. It creates a file named `storage/framework/blacklist.json`. This is where you store your blacklist. You can rename
   and relocate this file later, if you want to (see "Configuration" section).

## 🤙 Usage

Blacklister uses a JSON file to store your blacklist. By default, this file is located
under `storage/framework/blacklist.json`, but you can configure it to your needs (see below).
In that file, two keys are required: `emails` and `domains`, which both expect arrays as their respective value. As the
names
suggest, you can use these to block individual
email addresses or entire domains.

### ✅ Using the validation

Using blacklister is super easy. Just add the `blacklist` keyword to your validation and you're ready to block! Like so:

```php
public function store(Request $request) {
  
  $validated = $request->validate([
        'email' => 'required|email|blacklist',
    ]);
    
}
```

### 👀 Viewing the blacklist

One way is of course to just look at your JSON file. Another way is to run the following command to view the blacklist
in the console:

```bash
php artisan blacklister:view
```

### ➕ Adding new values to the blacklist

You can either paste the values **directly into the JSON file**, or use the following utility command:

```bash
php artisan blacklister:add {values} {--T|type}
```

| Argument | Description                                                                                        | Examples                                          |
|----------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| values   | The values you want to add to the blacklist. Multiple values are allowed.                          | `block@me.com`, `block@me.com leave-me@alone.com` |
| type     | The type of values you want to add to the blacklist (`emails` or `domains`). Defaults to `emails`. | `--type="emails"`,`--type="domains"`              |

For example:

```bash
# Block emails.
php artisan blacklister:add block@me.com leave-me@alone.com --type="emails"

# Block domain.
php artisan blacklister:add blockme.com --type="domains"
```

### ➖ Removing values from the blacklist

You can either remove the values **directly into the JSON file**, or use the following utility command:

```bash
php artisan blacklister:remove {values}
```

| Argument | Description                                                                    | Examples                                          |
|----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| values   | The values you want to remove from the blacklist. Multiple values are allowed. | `block@me.com`, `block@me.com leave-me@alone.com` |

For example:

```bash
php artisan blacklister:remove unblock@me.com i-am-not-dangerous.com
```

This command will automatically detect if the value is an individual email or a domain and remove the corresponding data
from your blacklist file.

### 🔄 Updating cache

If the cache for Blacklister is enabled (see below), the values from the JSON file are cached. This means that you need
to update the cache whenever the blacklist JSON file changes.

If you use the `backlister:add` or `blacklister:remove` utility-commands, this happens automatically. If you update the
JSON file manually, you need to execute the following command thereafter:

```bash
php artisan blacklister:update-cache
```

> [!WARNING]  
> You must **run this command on your production system** as well in order for the changes to take effect there.
> If you update your blacklist frequently, it might make sense to add `php artian blacklister:update-cache` to your
> deployment script.

### 💾 Exporting to CSV

You can export your blacklist to a csv file by executing the following command

```
php artisan blacklister:export {file}
```

Where `filename` is the path to the csv file you want to export your blacklist to.

For example:

```
php artisan blacklister:export /my/export/directory/blacklister.csv
```

### 💽 Importing from csv

Need to import your blacklist from a csv file? No problem. Just execute

```
php artisan blacklister:import {file}
```

Where `file` is the path to the csv file you want to import your blacklist from.

Example:

```
php artisan blacklister:import /my/import/directory/blacklister.csv
```

> [!WARNING]  
> Your csv file must have a specific format: It must have the headers "emails" and "domains".
> For an example file look at `/tests/fixtures/import_data.csv`

## ⚙️ Configuration

During the installation process, Blacklister creates the `config/blacklister.php` file for you, which defines how
blacklister behaves.

| Name               | Type    | Description                                                                                         | Example                                               |
|--------------------|---------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| blacklist_path     | string  | The absolute path to your blacklist file.                                                           | `storage_path('framework/email_blacklist.json')`      |
| enable_cache       | boolean | If true, the content of the blacklist json file will be cached.                                     | `true`                                                |
| cache_key          | string  | Defines under which cache key the data will be cached (if cache is enabled).                        | `'blacklist'`                                         |
| cache_ttl          | int     | The time in minutes for how long the blacklist will be cached (if cache is enabled).                | `60 * 24 * 4` (4 days)                                |
| validation_message | string  | The validation message that will be displayed if the validation fails (is translatable by default). | `'The value is not allowed. Please use another one.'` |

You can check if your configuration is valid by executing the following command:

```bash
php artisan blacklister:verify
```

## 😎 How it works

Blacklister is actually really simple. If cache is disabled, if fetches the content from the JSON file on every
request and then checks if the individual email or the entire domain is on the blacklist.

If cache is enabled, Blacklister first tries to retrieve the blacklist from the cache. If it doesn't find it, it
loads the data from the JSON file and puts it into the cache, so it can be used the next time.

Commit message:

Enable settings a cookie when validation fails to block any subsequent tries immediately.

README.md, after:

# 👮 Blacklister

Blacklist is a package for **Laravel** applications that enables you to validate email inputs against a blacklist.
You can block specific email addresses or entire domains.

## ⬇️ Installation

Install the package via composer:

```bash
composer require niclas-timm/blacklister
```

Next, run the following command to boostrap the necessary configuration:

```bash
php artisan blacklister:install
```

This does a few things:

1. It creates a `config/blacklister.php` file
2. It creates a file named `storage/framework/blacklist.json`. This is where you store your blacklist. You can rename
   and relocate this file later, if you want to (see "Configuration" section).

## 🤙 Usage

Blacklister uses a JSON file to store your blacklist. By default, this file is located
under `storage/framework/blacklist.json`, but you can configure it to your needs (see below).
In that file, two keys are required: `emails` and `domains`, which both expect arrays as their respective value. As the
names
suggest, you can use these to block individual
email addresses or entire domains.

### ✅ Using the validation

Using blacklister is super easy. Just add the `blacklist` keyword to your validation and you're ready to block! Like so:

```php
public function store(Request $request) {
  
  $validated = $request->validate([
        'email' => 'required|email|blacklist',
    ]);
    
}
```

### 👀 Viewing the blacklist

One way is of course to just look at your JSON file. Another way is to run the following command to view the blacklist
in the console:

```bash
php artisan blacklister:view
```

### ➕ Adding new values to the blacklist

You can either paste the values **directly into the JSON file**, or use the following utility command:

```bash
php artisan blacklister:add {values} {--T|type}
```

| Argument | Description                                                                                        | Examples                                          |
|----------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| values   | The values you want to add to the blacklist. Multiple values are allowed.                          | `block@me.com`, `block@me.com leave-me@alone.com` |
| type     | The type of values you want to add to the blacklist (`emails` or `domains`). Defaults to `emails`. | `--type="emails"`,`--type="domains"`              |

For example:

```bash
# Block emails.
php artisan blacklister:add block@me.com leave-me@alone.com --type="emails"

# Block domain.
php artisan blacklister:add blockme.com --type="domains"
```

### ➖ Removing values from the blacklist

You can either remove the values **directly into the JSON file**, or use the following utility command:

```bash
php artisan blacklister:remove {values}
```

| Argument | Description                                                                    | Examples                                          |
|----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| values   | The values you want to remove from the blacklist. Multiple values are allowed. | `block@me.com`, `block@me.com leave-me@alone.com` |

For example:

```bash
php artisan blacklister:remove unblock@me.com i-am-not-dangerous.com
```

This command will automatically detect if the value is an individual email or a domain and remove the corresponding data
from your blacklist file.

### 🍪 Using cookies

Ok, so you blocked someone. Now what? They can just use another email address and register anyways, right? Wrong! You
can set `enable_cookies` to `true` config file. Then, when a blacklister validation fails, a cookie will be set in the
users browser. Afterward, every validation will fail for as long as the cookie is valid. So if the user tries to
register with another email, it won't work. Obviously, this solution is not bulletproof. The user could use
incognito mode or use another browser. But it's better than nothing.

### 🔄 Updating cache

If the cache for Blacklister is enabled (see below), the values from the JSON file are cached. This means that you need
to update the cache whenever the blacklist JSON file changes.

If you use the `backlister:add` or `blacklister:remove` utility-commands, this happens automatically. If you update the
JSON file manually, you need to execute the following command thereafter:

```bash
php artisan blacklister:update-cache
```

> [!WARNING]  
> You must **run this command on your production system** as well in order for the changes to take effect there.
> If you update your blacklist frequently, it might make sense to add `php artian blacklister:update-cache` to your
> deployment script.

### 💾 Exporting to CSV

You can export your blacklist to a csv file by executing the following command

```
php artisan blacklister:export {file}
```

Where `filename` is the path to the csv file you want to export your blacklist to.

For example:

```
php artisan blacklister:export /my/export/directory/blacklister.csv
```

### 💽 Importing from csv

Need to import your blacklist from a csv file? No problem. Just execute

```
php artisan blacklister:import {file}
```

Where `file` is the path to the csv file you want to import your blacklist from.

Example:

```
php artisan blacklister:import /my/import/directory/blacklister.csv
```

> [!WARNING]  
> Your csv file must have a specific format: It must have the headers "emails" and "domains".
> For an example file look at `/tests/fixtures/import_data.csv`

## ⚙️ Configuration

During the installation process, Blacklister creates the `config/blacklister.php` file for you, which defines how
blacklister behaves.

| Name               | Type    | Description                                                                                                                                     | Example                                               |
|--------------------|---------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| blacklist_path     | string  | The absolute path to your blacklist file.                                                                                                       | `storage_path('framework/email_blacklist.json')`      |
| enable_cache       | boolean | If true, the content of the blacklist json file will be cached.                                                                                 | `true`                                                |
| cache_key          | string  | Defines under which cache key the data will be cached (if cache is enabled).                                                                    | `'blacklist'`                                         |
| cache_ttl          | int     | The time in minutes for how long the blacklist will be cached (if cache is enabled).                                                            | `60 * 24 * 4` (4 days)                                |
| validation_message | string  | The validation message that will be displayed if the validation fails (is translatable by default).                                             | `'The value is not allowed. Please use another one.'` |
| enable_cookies     | bool    | If true, a cookie will be set when the blacklister validation fails. Afterwards, every validation will fail for as long as the cookie is valid. | `true`                                                |
| cookie_name        | string  | The name of the cookie that will be set.                                                                                                        | `blacklister`                                         |
| cookie_ttl         | int     | The time in seconds for how long the cookie will be valid.                                                                                      | `60 * 24 * 30` (30 days)                              |

You can check if your configuration is valid by executing the following command:

```bash
php artisan blacklister:verify
```

## 😎 How it works

Blacklister is actually really simple. If cache is disabled, if fetches the content from the JSON file on every
request and then checks if the individual email or the entire domain is on the blacklist.

If cache is enabled, Blacklister first tries to retrieve the blacklist from the cache. If it doesn't find it, it
loads the data from the JSON file and puts it into the cache, so it can be used the next time.
